docs/asmc_python.md, before:

# ASMC Python API

- [Examples using the Python bindings](#examples-using-the-python-bindings)
- [API](#api)
  - [ASMC](#asmc)
  - [DecodePairsReturnStruct](#decodepairsreturnstruct)

ASMC includes Python bindings which can be installed using pip:

```
pip install asmc-asmc
```

Before reading further you may wish to read the [ASMC docs](./asmc.md).
In particular, these sections are directly relevant:
- [Summary (TL;DR)](./asmc.md#summary-tldr)
- [Input/output file formats](./asmc.md#inputoutput-file-formats)
- [Tools, scripts, and analyses](./asmc.md#tools-scripts-and-analyses)
- [Precomputed decoding quantities](./asmc.md#precomputed-decoding-quantities)


## Examples using the Python bindings

See the `notebooks` directory for examples.
There are two Jupyter notebooks:
- a [minimal working example](../notebooks/asmc-minimal.ipynb), where sensible defaults for parameters are chosen automatically
- a [more detailed example](../notebooks/asmc.ipynb) that demonstrates how to customise parameters

## API

The core Python API for ASMC consists of the following classes:
- `ASMC`
- `DecodingParams`
- `DecodePairsReturnStruct`

### ASMC

The main `ASMC` object can be constructed minimally with an input file root and a decoding quantities file.
Optional parameters are the output file root and the decoding mode.
The full signature (with defaults indicated) is as follows:

```python
asmc = ASMC(
    in_dir=input_files_root,          # path to the 
    dq_file=dq_file,                  # path to the decoding quantities file
    out_dir="",                       # location of output files (default is the input file root)
    decoding_mode="array"             # one of "array" or "sequence"
)
```

This creates an ASMC object with sensible defaults.
To fine-tune parameters you can instead create the ASMC object with an instance of `DecodingParams`:

```python
# These are the arguments (with defaults indicated) for constructing a decoding paramters object
params = DecodingParams(
    in_file_root=input_files_root,
    dq_file=dq_file,
    out_file_root="",
    jobs=1,                               # Number of jobs being done in total
    job_ind=1,                            # Job index (0, ..., jobs)
    decoding_mode_string="array",         # One of {"squence", "array"}
    decoding_sequence=False,
    using_CSFS=True,                      # Whether to use CSFS
    compress=False,                       # Compress emission to binary (no CSFS)
    use_ancestral=False,                  # Assume ancestral alleles are coded as 1 in input (will assume 1 = minor otherwise)
    skip_CSFS_distance=0.0,               # Genetic distance between two CSFS emissions
    no_batches=False,                     # Decode with no vectorization (do not use without good reason)
    do_posterior_sums=False,
    do_per_pair_posterior_mean=False,
    expected_coal_times_file="",
    within_only=False,
    do_major_minor_posterior_sums=False,  # 
    do_per_pair_MAP=False    
)

asmc = ASMC(params)
```

You can specify the outputs that will be calculated with the following methods (with defaults indicated):

```python
# Per pair posterior mean, MAP and full posteriors, as well as the sum of posteriors can be stored in matrices
asmc.set_store_per_pair_posterior_mean(True)  # <-- true by default; others false by default
asmc.set_store_per_pair_map(False)
asmc.set_store_per_pair_posterior(False)
asmc.set_store_sum_of_posterior(False)

# Per pair posterior mean and MAP can be written to file. This is typically slow.
asmc.set_write_per_pair_posterior_mean(False)
asmc.set_write_per_pair_map(False)
```

Finally, the ASMC method `decode_pairs` will run the analysis.
There are three different signatures available:

```python
a = [1, 2, 3]
b = [4, 5, 6]

a_str = [f"1_{x}_1" for x in range(1,149)]
b_str = [f"1_{x}_2" for x in range(1,149)]

asmc.decode_pairs(a, b)           # two lists of haplotype indices
asmc.decode_pairs(a_str, b_str)   # two lists of haplotype IDs, with _1 and _2 indicating the haplotype
asmc.decode_pairs()               # <-- decode all pairs in the dataset
```

The results can then be accessed either by copy or reference:

```python
return_vals = asmc.get_copy_of_results()
return_vals_ref = asmc.get_ref_of_results()
```

Getting the values by reference is safe if you are only planning to call `decode_pairs` once, or if you are performing calculations that do not require the results to persist after the first call to `decode_pairs`.
If you call `decode_pairs` multiple times, the results will be overwritten, so you should ensure you get results by copy.

### DecodePairsReturnStruct

The return structure will contain results based on the options selected on the ASMC object before calling `decode_pairs`.
```python
# The index information for the pairs decoded
return_vals.per_pair_indices

# The `per_pair_posteriors` option gives the largest amount of information: a list of 2D numpy arrays
# The list has length numPairs, and each 2D array has size (numStates x numSites)
return_vals.per_pair_posteriors

# The sum of posteriors is a single 2D numpy array of size (numStates x numSites)
return_vals.sum_of_posteriors

# Turning on the per_pair_posteriors flag gives you the the following:
# A 2D numpy array with posterior means, of size (numPairs x numSites)
return_vals.per_pair_posterior_means
# Two 1D numpy arrays with the column-wise min and argmin of this array:
return_vals.min_posterior_means
return_vals.argmin_posterior_means

# Turning on the per_pair_MAPs flag gives you the the following:
# A 2D numpy array with posterior MAPs, of size (numPairs x numSites)
return_vals.per_pair_MAPs
# Two 1D numpy arrays with the column-wise min and argmin of this array:
return_vals.min_MAPs
return_vals.argmin_MAPs
```

Finally, the ASMC object can also return the list of expected coalescent times from the decoding quantities file:
asmc.get_expected_times()

Commit message:

Add documentation for new map file param

docs/asmc_python.md, after:

# ASMC Python API

- [Examples using the Python bindings](#examples-using-the-python-bindings)
- [API](#api)
  - [ASMC](#asmc)
  - [DecodePairsReturnStruct](#decodepairsreturnstruct)

ASMC includes Python bindings which can be installed using pip:

```
pip install asmc-asmc
```

Before reading further you may wish to read the [ASMC docs](./asmc.md).
In particular, these sections are directly relevant:
- [Summary (TL;DR)](./asmc.md#summary-tldr)
- [Input/output file formats](./asmc.md#inputoutput-file-formats)
- [Tools, scripts, and analyses](./asmc.md#tools-scripts-and-analyses)
- [Precomputed decoding quantities](./asmc.md#precomputed-decoding-quantities)


## Examples using the Python bindings

See the `notebooks` directory for examples.
There are two Jupyter notebooks:
- a [minimal working example](../notebooks/asmc-minimal.ipynb), where sensible defaults for parameters are chosen automatically
- a [more detailed example](../notebooks/asmc.ipynb) that demonstrates how to customise parameters

## API

The core Python API for ASMC consists of the following classes:
- `ASMC`
- `DecodingParams`
- `DecodePairsReturnStruct`

### ASMC

The main `ASMC` object can be constructed minimally with an input file root and a decoding quantities file.
Optional parameters are the output file root and the decoding mode.
The full signature (with defaults indicated) is as follows:

```python
asmc = ASMC(
    in_dir=input_files_root,          # path to the 
    dq_file=dq_file,                  # path to the decoding quantities file
    out_dir="",                       # location of output files (default is the input file root)
    decoding_mode="array"             # one of "array" or "sequence"
)
```

This creates an ASMC object with sensible defaults.
To fine-tune parameters you can instead create the ASMC object with an instance of `DecodingParams`:

```python
# These are the arguments (with defaults indicated) for constructing a decoding paramters object
params = DecodingParams(
    in_file_root=input_files_root,
    dq_file=dq_file,
    map_file="",                          # Optional override for map|map.gz file, if not in in_file_root
    out_file_root="",
    jobs=1,                               # Number of jobs being done in total
    job_ind=1,                            # Job index (0, ..., jobs)
    decoding_mode_string="array",         # One of {"squence", "array"}
    decoding_sequence=False,
    using_CSFS=True,                      # Whether to use CSFS
    compress=False,                       # Compress emission to binary (no CSFS)
    use_ancestral=False,                  # Assume ancestral alleles are coded as 1 in input (will assume 1 = minor otherwise)
    skip_CSFS_distance=0.0,               # Genetic distance between two CSFS emissions
    no_batches=False,                     # Decode with no vectorization (do not use without good reason)
    do_posterior_sums=False,
    do_per_pair_posterior_mean=False,
    expected_coal_times_file="",
    within_only=False,
    do_major_minor_posterior_sums=False,  # 
    do_per_pair_MAP=False    
)

asmc = ASMC(params)
```

You can specify the outputs that will be calculated with the following methods (with defaults indicated):

```python
# Per pair posterior mean, MAP and full posteriors, as well as the sum of posteriors can be stored in matrices
asmc.set_store_per_pair_posterior_mean(True)  # <-- true by default; others false by default
asmc.set_store_per_pair_map(False)
asmc.set_store_per_pair_posterior(False)
asmc.set_store_sum_of_posterior(False)

# Per pair posterior mean and MAP can be written to file. This is typically slow.
asmc.set_write_per_pair_posterior_mean(False)
asmc.set_write_per_pair_map(False)
```

Finally, the ASMC method `decode_pairs` will run the analysis.
There are three different signatures available:

```python
a = [1, 2, 3]
b = [4, 5, 6]

a_str = [f"1_{x}_1" for x in range(1,149)]
b_str = [f"1_{x}_2" for x in range(1,149)]

asmc.decode_pairs(a, b)           # two lists of haplotype indices
asmc.decode_pairs(a_str, b_str)   # two lists of haplotype IDs, with _1 and _2 indicating the haplotype
asmc.decode_pairs()               # <-- decode all pairs in the dataset
```

The results can then be accessed either by copy or reference:

```python
return_vals = asmc.get_copy_of_results()
return_vals_ref = asmc.get_ref_of_results()
```

Getting the values by reference is safe if you are only planning to call `decode_pairs` once, or if you are performing calculations that do not require the results to persist after the first call to `decode_pairs`.
If you call `decode_pairs` multiple times, the results will be overwritten, so you should ensure you get results by copy.

### DecodePairsReturnStruct

The return structure will contain results based on the options selected on the ASMC object before calling `decode_pairs`.
```python
# The index information for the pairs decoded
return_vals.per_pair_indices

# The `per_pair_posteriors` option gives the largest amount of information: a list of 2D numpy arrays
# The list has length numPairs, and each 2D array has size (numStates x numSites)
return_vals.per_pair_posteriors

# The sum of posteriors is a single 2D numpy array of size (numStates x numSites)
return_vals.sum_of_posteriors

# Turning on the per_pair_posteriors flag gives you the the following:
# A 2D numpy array with posterior means, of size (numPairs x numSites)
return_vals.per_pair_posterior_means
# Two 1D numpy arrays with the column-wise min and argmin of this array:
return_vals.min_posterior_means
return_vals.argmin_posterior_means

# Turning on the per_pair_MAPs flag gives you the the following:
# A 2D numpy array with posterior MAPs, of size (numPairs x numSites)
return_vals.per_pair_MAPs
# Two 1D numpy arrays with the column-wise min and argmin of this array:
return_vals.min_MAPs
return_vals.argmin_MAPs
```

Finally, the ASMC object can also return the list of expected coalescent times from the decoding quantities file:
asmc.get_expected_times()
